### Project Quality

When you plan a project you must consider the quality of the project and the final
product, service or result that is produced. Both the quality of the project and
product must be considered and planned for.

Project quality is typically measured by how well you meet the customer’s
requirements.

Customer satisfaction is achieved when the project manager and the project team
understand, evaluate, define, and manage expectations so that the customer’s
requirements are met.

A quality management plan is developed to help the project meet its quality
objectives. A quality management plan is usually made up of three key parts:

- Identify the quality standards required in this project. The goal is to meet the
  standards you set. You don't want quality that is less than required or higher
  than required.

- Define a quality assurance plan. Document how you will demonstrate that the
  quality standards have been met. Quality can be demonstrated in many forms
  including formal project audits, lessons learned, and project reviews.
- Define the quality control process. This describes how you will monitor and
  measure the quality of results. Figure out ways to eliminate causes of
  unsatisfactory performance by improving and adjusting processes and
  measurements, and then make updates to the project management plan.



In many organizations internationally recognized quality standards may be part of the corporate culture. These include:

- ISO quality standards,

- Total Quality Management (TQM),

- Six Sigma,

- Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA),

- Design Reviews,

- Advance Product Quality Planning (APQP) and others.

  It is important to know what your organization requires and ensure that you comply.

Some other ideas to keep in mind when thinking about the quality of your project and products:

- Prevention over Inspection: The cost of preventing mistakes is generally much less than the cost of correcting mistakes. Quality is planned, designed, and built in, and is not inspected in. Therefore it is a good idea to plan to do things right the first time.
- Adequate resources: The success of a project is made possible by all members contributing to the project team. It is the responsibility of the project manager, the project sponsor along with the key management stakeholders to ensure that the project is given the resources it needs to succeed.

Continuous improvement is an important part of quality management.

A process or approach that may be satisfactory today may not be satisfactory tomorrow. The project team must recognize that things will constantly change as the project evolves. This means that they must frequently look at project processes with a plan-do-check-act cycle in order to ensure they continually improve.

A good thought to keep in mind: The customer is the next person who will see the product or service your project is producing. If you were that customer would you be satisfied with the result?



Quality Control

Performing Quality Control involves monitoring specific project results in order to determine whether they comply with the relevant quality standards and then finding ways to remove the causes of unsatisfactory results.

Some of the tools available to the project team for performing quality control are:

- Inspection: Measuring, examining and testing to determine whether or not the results conform to the requirements.
- Control charts: Graphical displays of results over time to determine if the project process is under control.
- Pareto diagram: A histogram ordered by frequency of occurrence. It shows how many results were generated by type or category of identified cause.
- Flow Charting techniques: Techniques that show pictorially the cause and effect of poor quality. For example - cause and effect diagram, fishbone diagram,
- Checklists: The checklist can be a simple way to ensure that quality steps are being taken.



A project quality audit or review is a structured, independent review of project activities performed to determine whether or not the project activities have met organizational and project policies, processes, and procedures.

The goal of the audit is to identify lessons learned so that future phases of the project, or future projects may benefit.

The project audit or review performs three things.

- It evaluates if the project delivered the expected benefits to all stakeholders.

- It assesses what was done wrong and what was done right.

- It identifies changes and improvements that can be applied to the delivery of future projects.

  The results of the post project review should be considered when planning the details of the next phase or the details of the next project.

  

### Managing the Project team

The project manager has to be skilled in communicating with people at all levels in the organization. They must be able to clearly articulate messages outwardly to the customer and the organization’s management team as well as inwardly to the people who do the project work.

Managing a project team requires communication and leadership skills.

Communication is more than just telling someone something. You must be able to get your messages across so the other person understands.

Tailor your message to your audience. This includes what you say and how you say it but also needs to consider the best methods, and media, for delivering the message.

Communication can be complicated in many organizations because team members are accountable to both the project manager and their functional manager. They may have divided or confusing loyalties.

Make sure that your project team understands their roles and responsibilities clearly. Let them know what they are responsible for and what you expect of them. Do this by giving them specific and achievable goals. Trust them to respond to the challenges you set.



Set a standard for the project. By letting people know you have a high standard you will set the expectation for success. Setting a low standard only encourages substandard performance.

Let people know it’s OK to succeed. Encourage them to show initiative within acceptable boundaries and to make decisions when appropriate.

Practice the golden rule: Treat people as you would have them treat you.

Make sure that the critical success targets are understood and realistic and that you’ve made accurate estimates.

Give people feedback quickly. Positive reinforcement helps build your relationship with them and ensures that people do more of what works well. Correcting negative behavior as soon as possible won’t let wrong things stay wrong.

Resolving Team Conflict

It is inevitable that conflict will arise on a project. The project manager must be ready to recognize conflict and take steps to resolve it quickly in order to achieve project success.

Conflict may positively support the project objectives.

Conflict may be negative and disruptive to the goals of the project. When conflict is negative the project manager must find a way to deal with it quickly and if possible turn it into something positive for the project.

Regardless of the type of conflict, it should be addressed as early as possible.

The project manager is responsible for building a foundation that supports positive conflict and constructive feedback while dealing with negative and disruptive conflict.



Management and Leadership

It takes a special person to be both a good manager and a leader. The project manager has to balance both skills sets in order for the project to be successful.

Some of the Leadership skills discussed in previous videos can also be useful tools for managing your project team:

- Manage by walking around
- Lead by example
- Project team meetings
- Set project ground rules
- Build a Team identity
